Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for
                Computational Linguistics (ACL), Philadelphia, July 2002, pp. 311-318.

BLEU: a Method for Automatic Evaluation of Machine Translation

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center

Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA
{papineni,roukos,toddward,weijing}@us.ibm.com

Abstract the evaluation bottleneck. Developers would bene-
fit from an inexpensive automatic evaluation that is

Human evaluations of machine translation quick, language-independent, and correlates highly
are extensive but expensive. Human eval- with human evaluation. We propose such an evalua-
uations can take months to finish and in- tion method in this paper.
volve human labor that can not be reused.
We propose a method of automatic ma- 1.2 Viewpoint
chine translation evaluation that is quick,

How does one measure translation performance?
inexpensive, and language-independent,

The closer a machine translation is to a professional
that correlates highly with human evalu-

human translation, the better it is. This is the cen-
ation, and that has little marginal cost per

tral idea behind our proposal. To judge the quality
run. We present this method as an auto-

of a machine translation, one measures its closeness
mated understudy to skilled human judges

to one or more reference human translations accord-
which substitutes for them when there is

ing to a numerical metric. Thus, our MT evaluation
need for quick or frequent evaluations.1

system requires two ingredients:

1 Introduction 1. a numerical “translation closeness” metric

1.1 Rationale 2. a corpus of good quality human reference trans-
Human evaluations of machine translation (MT) lations
weigh many aspects of translation, including ade-
quacy, fidelity , and fluency of the translation (Hovy, We fashion our closeness metric after the highly suc-
1999; White and O’Connell, 1994). A compre- cessful word error rate metric used by the speech
hensive catalog of MT evaluation techniques and recognition community, appropriately modified for
their rich literature is given by Reeder (2001). For multiple reference translations and allowing for le-
the most part, these various human evaluation ap- gitimate differences in word choice and word or-
proaches are quite expensive (Hovy, 1999). More- der. The main idea is to use a weighted average of
over, they can take weeks or months to finish. This is variable length phrase matches against the reference
a big problem because developers of machine trans- translations. This view gives rise to a family of met-
lation systems need to monitor the effect of daily rics using various weighting schemes. We have se-
changes to their systems in order to weed out bad lected a promising baseline metric from this family.
ideas from good ideas. We believe that MT progress In Section 2, we describe the baseline metric in
stems from evaluation and that there is a logjam of detail. In Section 3, we evaluate the performance of
fruitful research ideas waiting to be released from BLEU. In Section 4, we describe a human evaluation

1So we call our method the bilingual evaluation understudy, experiment. In Section 5, we compare our baseline
BLEU. metric performance with human evaluations.



2 The Baseline BLEU Metric large collections of translations presented in Section
5 show that this ranking ability is a general phe-

Typically, there are many “perfect” translations of a nomenon, and not an artifact of a few toy examples.
given source sentence. These translations may vary The primary programming task for a BLEU imple-
in word choice or in word order even when they use mentor is to compare n-grams of the candidate with
the same words. And yet humans can clearly dis- the n-grams of the reference translation and count
tinguish a good translation from a bad one. For ex- the number of matches. These matches are position-
ample, consider these two candidate translations of independent. The more the matches, the better the
a Chinese source sentence: candidate translation is. For simplicity, we first fo-
Example 1. cus on computing unigram matches.
Candidate 1: It is a guide to action which
ensures that the military always obeys 2.1 Modified n-gram precision
the commands of the party. The cornerstone of our metric is the familiar pre-
Candidate 2: It is to insure the troops cision measure. To compute precision, one simply
forever hearing the activity guidebook counts up the number of candidate translation words
that party direct. (unigrams) which occur in any reference translation

and then divides by the total number of words in
Although they appear to be on the same subject, they

the candidate translation. Unfortunately, MT sys-
differ markedly in quality. For comparison, we pro-

tems can overgenerate “reasonable” words, result-
vide three reference human translations of the same

ing in improbable, but high-precision, translations
sentence below.

like that of example 2 below. Intuitively the prob-
Reference 1: It is a guide to action that lem is clear: a reference word should be considered
ensures that the military will forever exhausted after a matching candidate word is iden-
heed Party commands. tified. We formalize this intuition as the modified
Reference 2: It is the guiding principle unigram precision. To compute this, one first counts
which guarantees the military forces the maximum number of times a word occurs in any
always being under the command of the single reference translation. Next, one clips the to-
Party. tal count of each candidate word by its maximum

reference count,2adds these clipped counts up, and
Reference 3: It is the practical guide for

divides by the total (unclipped) number of candidate
the army always to heed the directions

words.
of the party. Example 2.

It is clear that the good translation, Candidate 1, Candidate: the the the the the the the.
shares many words and phrases with these three ref- Reference 1: The cat is on the mat.
erence translations, while Candidate 2 does not. We
will shortly quantify this notion of sharing in Sec- Reference 2: There is a cat on the mat.

tion 2.1. But first observe that Candidate 1 shares Modified Unigram Precision = 2/7.3
"It is a guide to action" with Reference 1,

In Example 1, Candidate 1 achieves a modified
"which" with Reference 2, "ensures that the

unigram precision of 17/18; whereas Candidate
military" with Reference 1, "always" with Ref-

2 achieves a modified unigram precision of 8/14.
erences 2 and 3, "commands" with Reference 1, and

Similarly, the modified unigram precision in Exam-
finally "of the party" with Reference 2 (all ig-

ple 2 is 2/7, even though its standard unigram pre-
noring capitalization). In contrast, Candidate 2 ex-

cision is 7/7.
hibits far fewer matches, and their extent is less.

It is clear that a program can rank Candidate 1 2Countclip = min(Count,Max Re f Count). In other words,
higher than Candidate 2 simply by comparing n- one truncates each word’s count, if necessary, to not exceed the

largest count observed in any single reference for that word.
gram matches between each candidate translation 3As a guide to the eye, we have underlined the important
and the reference translations. Experiments over words for computing modified precision.



Modified n-gram precision is computed similarly 2.1.2 Ranking systems using only modified
for any n: all candidate n-gram counts and their n-gram precision
corresponding maximum reference counts are col- To verify that modified n-gram precision distin-
lected. The candidate counts are clipped by their guishes between very good translations and bad
corresponding reference maximum value, summed, translations, we computed the modified precision
and divided by the total number of candidate n- numbers on the output of a (good) human transla-
grams. In Example 1, Candidate 1 achieves a mod- tor and a standard (poor) machine translation system
ified bigram precision of 10/17, whereas the lower using 4 reference translations for each of 127 source
quality Candidate 2 achieves a modified bigram pre- sentences. The average precision results are shown
cision of 1/13. In Example 2, the (implausible) can- in Figure 1.
didate achieves a modified bigram precision of 0.
This sort of modified n-gram precision scoring cap-
tures two aspects of translation: adequacy and flu- Figure 1: Distinguishing Human from Machine
ency. A translation using the same words (1-grams) 



as in the references tends to satisfy adequacy. The 	

longer n-gram matches account for fluency. 4 




2.1.1 Modified n-gram precision on blocks of 

text 


   
How do we compute modified n-gram precision



on a multi-sentence test set? Although one typically
evaluates MT systems on a corpus of entire docu-
ments, our basic unit of evaluation is the sentence. The strong signal differentiating human (high pre-

A source sentence may translate to many target sen- cision) from machine (low precision) is striking.

tences, in which case we abuse terminology and re- The difference becomes stronger as we go from un-

fer to the corresponding target sentences as a “sen- igram precision to 4-gram precision. It appears that

tence.” We first compute the n-gram matches sen- any single n-gram precision score can distinguish

tence by sentence. Next, we add the clipped n-gram between a good translation and a bad translation.

counts for all the candidate sentences and divide by To be useful, however, the metric must also reliably

the number of candidate n-grams in the test corpus distinguish between translations that do not differ so

to compute a modified precision score, p greatly in quality. Furthermore, it must distinguish
n, for the

entire test corpus. between two human translations of differing quality.
This latter requirement ensures the continued valid-
ity of the metric as MT approaches human transla-

pn = tion quality.
∑ ∑ Countclip(n-gram) To this end, we obtained a human translation

C∈{Candidates} n-gram∈C
. by someone lacking native proficiency in both the

∑ ∑ Count(n-gram′) source (Chinese) and the target language (English).
C ′∈{Candidates} n-gram′∈C ′

For comparison, we acquired human translations of
the same documents by a native English speaker. We

4BLEU only needs to match human judgment when averaged also obtained machine translations by three commer-
over a test corpus; scores on individual sentences will often vary cial systems. These five “systems” — two humans
from human judgments. For example, a system which produces and three machines — are scored against two refer-
the fluent phrase “East Asian economy” is penalized heavily on
the longer n-gram precisions if all the references happen to read ence professional human translations. The average
“economy of East Asia.” The key to BLEU’s success is that modified n-gram precision results are shown in Fig-
all systems are treated similarly and multiple human translators
with different styles are used, so this effect cancels out in com- ure 2.
parisons between systems. Each of these n-gram statistics implies the same





lingual human judgments using a maximum n-gram
Figure 2: Machine and Human Translations

order of 4, although 3-grams and 5-grams give com-
	 parable results.


 2.2 Sentence length


A candidate translation should be neither too long
 nor too short, and an evaluation metric should en-
 force this. To some extent, the n-gram precision al-
 ready accomplishes this. N-gram precision penal-
 izes spurious words in the candidate that do not ap-

   
pear in any of the reference translations. Addition-


 ally, modified precision is penalized if a word oc-
     curs more frequently in a candidate translation than

its maximum reference count. This rewards using
a word as many times as warranted and penalizes

ranking: H2 (Human-2) is better than H1 (Human- using a word more times than it occurs in any of
1), and there is a big drop in quality between H1 and the references. However, modified n-gram precision
S3 (Machine/System-3). S3 appears better than S2 alone fails to enforce the proper translation length,
which in turn appears better than S1. Remarkably, as is illustrated in the short, absurd example below.
this is the same rank order assigned to these “sys- Example 3:
tems” by human judges, as we discuss later. While Candidate: of the
there seems to be ample signal in any single n-gram
precision, it is more robust to combine all these sig- Reference 1: It is a guide to action that

nals into a single number metric. ensures that the military will forever
heed Party commands.

2.1.3 Combining the modified n-gram Reference 2: It is the guiding principle
precisions

which guarantees the military forces
How should we combine the modified precisions always being under the command of the

for the various n-gram sizes? A weighted linear av- Party.
erage of the modified precisions resulted in encour- Reference 3: It is the practical guide for
aging results for the 5 systems. However, as can be

the army always to heed the directions
seen in Figure 2, the modified n-gram precision de-

of the party.
cays roughly exponentially with n: the modified un-
igram precision is much larger than the modified bi- Because this candidate is so short compared to
gram precision which in turn is much bigger than the the proper length, one expects to find inflated pre-
modified trigram precision. A reasonable averag- cisions: the modified unigram precision is 2/2, and
ing scheme must take this exponential decay into ac- the modified bigram precision is 1/1.
count; a weighted average of the logarithm of modi-
fied precisions satisifies this requirement. 2.2.1 The trouble with recall

BLEU uses the average logarithm with uniform Traditionally, precision has been paired with
weights, which is equivalent to using the geometric recall to overcome such length-related problems.
mean of the modified n-gram precisions.5 ,6 Experi- However, BLEU considers multiple reference trans-
mentally, we obtain the best correlation with mono- lations, each of which may use a different word

choice to translate the same source word. Further-
5The geometric average is harsh if any of the modified pre- more, a good candidate translation will only use (re-

cisions vanish, but this should be an extremely rare event in test
corpora of reasonable size (for Nmax ≤ 4). call) one of these possible choices, but not all. In-

6Using the geometric average also yields slightly stronger deed, recalling all choices leads to a bad translation.
correlation with human judgments than our best results using Here is an example.
an arithmetic average.






Example 4: penalty to be a decaying exponential in r/c, where c
Candidate 1: I always invariably perpetu- is the total length of the candidate translation corpus.
ally do. 2.3 BLEU details
Candidate 2: I always do.

We take the geometric mean of the test corpus’
Reference 1: I always do. modified precision scores and then multiply the re-
Reference 2: I invariably do. sult by an exponential brevity penalty factor. Cur-
Reference 3: I perpetually do. rently, case folding is the only text normalization

The first candidate recalls more words from the performed before computing the precision.

references, but is obviously a poorer translation than We first compute the geometric average of the

the second candidate. Thus, naı̈ve recall computed modified n-gram precisions, pn, using n-grams up to

over the set of all reference words is not a good length N and positive weights wn summing to one.

measure. Admittedly, one could align the refer- Next, let c be the length of the candidate transla-

ence translations to discover synonymous words and tion and r be the effective reference corpus length.

compute recall on concepts rather than words. But, We compute the brevity penalty BP,
{

given that reference translations vary in length and 1 if c > r
differ in word order and syntax, such a computation BP =

e(1−r/c) .
if c ≤ r

is complicated.
Then,

2.2.2 Sentence brevity penalty ( )

N
Candidate translations longer than their refer- BLEU= BP · exp ∑ wn log pn .

ences are already penalized by the modified n-gram n=1
precision measure: there is no need to penalize them

The ranking behavior is more immediately apparent
again. Consequently, we introduce a multiplicative

in the log domain,
brevity penalty factor. With this brevity penalty in
place, a high-scoring candidate translation must now r N

match the reference translations in length, in word log BLEU = min(1− ,0)+ lo p .
c ∑ wn g n

n=1
choice, and in word order. Note that neither this
brevity penalty nor the modified n-gram precision In our baseline, we use N = 4 and uniform weights
length effect directly considers the source length; in- wn = 1/N.
stead, they consider the range of reference transla- 3 The BLEU Evaluation
tion lengths in the target language.

We wish to make the brevity penalty 1.0 when the The BLEU metric ranges from 0 to 1. Few transla-
candidate’s length is the same as any reference trans- tions will attain a score of 1 unless they are identi-
lation’s length. For example, if there are three ref- cal to a reference translation. For this reason, even
erences with lengths 12, 15, and 17 words and the a human translator will not necessarily score 1. It
candidate translation is a terse 12 words, we want is important to note that the more reference trans-
the brevity penalty to be 1. We call the closest refer- lations per sentence there are, the higher the score
ence sentence length the “best match length.” is. Thus, one must be cautious making even “rough”

One consideration remains: if we computed the comparisons on evaluations with different numbers
brevity penalty sentence by sentence and averaged of reference translations: on a test corpus of about
the penalties, then length deviations on short sen- 500 sentences (40 general news stories), a human
tences would be punished harshly. Instead, we com- translator scored 0.3468 against four references and
pute the brevity penalty over the entire corpus to al- scored 0.2571 against two references. Table 1 shows
low some freedom at the sentence level. We first the BLEU scores of the 5 systems against two refer-
compute the test corpus’ effective reference length, ences on this test corpus.
r, by summing the best match lengths for each can- The MT systems S2 and S3 are very close in this
didate sentence in the corpus. We choose the brevity metric. Hence, several questions arise:



translation, provided that the translations are not all
Table 1: BLEU on 500 sentences

from the same translator.
S1 S2 S3 H1 H2

0.0527 0.0829 0.0930 0.1934 0.2571 4 The Human Evaluation

We had two groups of human judges. The first
Table 2: Paired t-statistics on 20 blocks group, called the monolingual group, consisted of 10

S1 S2 S3 H1 H2 native speakers of English. The second group, called
Mean 0.051 0.081 0.090 0.192 0.256 the bilingual group, consisted of 10 native speakers
StdDev 0.017 0.025 0.020 0.030 0.039 of Chinese who had lived in the United States for
t — 6 3.4 24 11 the past several years. None of the human judges

was a professional translator. The humans judged
our 5 standard systems on a Chinese sentence sub-

• Is the difference in BLEU metric reliable? set extracted at random from our 500 sentence test

• What is the variance of the BLEU score? corpus. We paired each source sentence with each
of its 5 translations, for a total of 250 pairs of Chi-

• If we were to pick another random set of 500 nese source and English translations. We prepared a
sentences, would we still judge S3 to be better web page with these translation pairs randomly or-
than S2? dered to disperse the five translations of each source

sentence. All judges used this same webpage and
To answer these questions, we divided the test cor- saw the sentence pairs in the same order. They rated
pus into 20 blocks of 25 sentences each, and com- each translation from 1 (very bad) to 5 (very good).
puted the BLEU metric on these blocks individually. The monolingual group made their judgments based
We thus have 20 samples of the BLEU metric for only on the translations’ readability and fluency.
each system. We computed the means, variances,

As must be expected, some judges were more lib-
and paired t-statistics which are displayed in Table

eral than others. And some sentences were easier
2. The t-statistic compares each system with its left

to translate than others. To account for the intrin-
neighbor in the table. For example, t = 6 for the pair

sic difference between judges and the sentences, we
S1 and S2.

compared each judge’s rating for a sentence across
Note that the numbers in Table 1 are the BLEU

systems. We performed four pairwise t-test compar-
metric on an aggregate of 500 sentences, but the

isons between adjacent systems as ordered by their
means in Table 2 are averages of the BLEU metric

aggregate average score.
on aggregates of 25 sentences. As expected, these
two sets of results are close for each system and dif- 4.1 Monolingual group pairwise judgments
fer only by small finite block size effects. Since a

Figure 3 shows the mean difference between the
paired t-statistic of 1.7 or above is 95% significant,

scores of two consecutive systems and the 95% con-
the differences between the systems’ scores are sta-

fidence interval about the mean. We see that S2 is
tistically very significant. The reported variance on

quite a bit better than S1 (by a mean opinion score
25-sentence blocks serves as an upper bound to the

difference of 0.326 on the 5-point scale), while S3
variance of sizeable test sets like the 500 sentence

is judged a little better (by 0.114). Both differences
corpus.

are significant at the 95% level.7 The human H1 is
How many reference translations do we need?

much better than the best system, though a bit worse
We simulated a single-reference test corpus by ran-

than human H2. This is not surprising given that H1
domly selecting one of the 4 reference translations

is not a native speaker of either Chinese or English,
as the single reference for each of the 40 stories. In
this way, we ensured a degree of stylistic variation. 7The 95% confidence interval comes from t-test, assuming
The systems maintain the same rank order as with that the data comes from a T-distribution with N degrees of free-

dom. N varied from 350 to 470 as some judges have skipped
multiple references. This outcome suggests that we some sentences in their evaluation. Thus, the distribution is
may use a big test corpus with a single reference close to Gaussian.



whereas H2 is a native English speaker. Again, the 5 BLEU vs The Human Evaluation
difference between the human translators is signifi-

Figure 5 shows a linear regression of the monolin-
cant beyond the 95% level.

gual group scores as a function of the BLEU score
over two reference translations for the 5 systems.

Figure 3: Monolingual Judgments - pairwise differ- The high correlation coefficient of 0.99 indicates
ential comparison that BLEU tracks human judgment well. Particularly

 interesting is how well BLEU distinguishes between
S2 and S3 which are quite close. Figure 6 shows

 the comparable regression results for the bilingual
 group. The correlation coefficient is 0.96.



Figure 5: BLEU predicts Monolingual Judgments





    


    	



   
 


 	   



4.2 Bilingual group pairwise judgments 

Figure 4 shows the same results for the bilingual    

group. They also find that S3 is slightly better than 	
S2 (at 95% confidence) though they judge that the
human translations are much closer (indistinguish- 	

 	
able at 95% confidence), suggesting that the bilin-
guals tended to focus more on adequacy than on flu-
ency.

Figure 6: BLEU predicts Bilingual Judgments
Figure 4: Bilingual Judgments - pairwise differential 
comparison 

 
















   


    	

  	
 	  	
	
 
 
 	  

   
 

We now take the worst system as a reference point

and compare the BLEU scores with the human judg-



 




ment scores of the remaining systems relative to ments by averaging out individual sentence judg-
the worst system. We took the BLEU, monolingual ment errors over a test corpus rather than attempting
group, and bilingual group scores for the 5 systems to divine the exact human judgment for every sen-
and linearly normalized them by their correspond- tence: quantity leads to quality.
ing range (the maximum and minimum score across Finally, since MT and summarization can both be
the 5 systems). The normalized scores are shown in viewed as natural language generation from a tex-
Figure 7. This figure illustrates the high correlation tual context, we believe BLEU could be adapted to
between the BLEU score and the monolingual group. evaluating summarization or similar NLG tasks.
Of particular interest is the accuracy of BLEU’s esti-
mate of the small difference between S2 and S3 and Acknowledgments This work was partially sup-
the larger difference between S3 and H1. The figure ported by the Defense Advanced Research Projects
also highlights the relatively large gap between MT Agency and monitored by SPAWAR under contract
systems and human translators.8 In addition, we sur- No. N66001-99-2-8916. The views and findings
mise that the bilingual group was very forgiving in contained in this material are those of the authors
judging H1 relative to H2 because the monolingual and do not necessarily reflect the position of pol-
group found a rather large difference in the fluency icy of the Government and no official endorsement
of their translations. should be inferred.

We gratefully acknowledge comments about the
Figure 7: BLEU vs Bilingual and Monolingual Judg- geometric mean by John Makhoul of BBN and dis-
ments cussions with George Doddington of NIST. We es-

pecially wish to thank our colleagues who served


 in the monolingual and bilingual judge pools for

 their perseverance in judging the output of Chinese-
	 English MT systems.




 References


 E.H. Hovy. 1999. Toward finely differentiated evaluation
 metrics for machine translation. In Proceedings of the

Eagles Workshop on Standards and Evaluation, Pisa,


Italy.
    

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, John Hen-
  

derson, and Florence Reeder. 2002. Corpus-based
comprehensive and diagnostic MT evaluation: Initial
Arabic, Chinese, French, and Spanish results. In Pro-
ceedings of Human Language Technology 2002, San

6 Conclusion Diego, CA. To appear.

We believe that BLEU will accelerate the MT R&D Florence Reeder. 2001. Additional mt-eval references.
cycle by allowing researchers to rapidly home in on Technical report, International Standards for Language
effective modeling ideas. Our belief is reinforced Engineering, Evaluation Working Group. http://issco-
by a recent statistical analysis of B www.unige.ch/projects/isle/taxonomy2/

LEU’s correla-
tion with human judgment for translation into En- J.S. White and T. O’Connell. 1994. The ARPA MT eval-
glish from four quite different languages (Arabic, uation methodologies: evolution, lessons, and future
Chinese, French, Spanish) representing 3 different approaches. In Proceedings of the First Conference of

the Association for Machine Translation in the Ameri-
language families (Papineni et al., 2002)! BLEU’s cas, pages 193–205, Columbia, Maryland.
strength is that it correlates highly with human judg-

8Crossing this chasm for Chinese-English translation ap-
pears to be a significant challenge for the current state-of-the-art
systems.