Course Outline 
1. COURSE INFORMATION 
Session Offered Winter 2025 
Course Name Introduction to Computational Natural Language Processing 
Course Code SEP 775 
Date(s) and Time(s) of Lectures (In-person):  
lectures Wednesday 11:30 am – 2:30 pm 
Program Name System and Technology 
Calendar Description This graduate course introduces fundamental concepts in computational natural 

language processing (NLP) and their applications to teaching students how to deal with 
textual data in Artificial Intelligence. This course demonstrates how machines can learn 
different tasks in natural language, such as language modeling, text generation, machine 
translation, and language understanding. In this regard, we go over the most promising 
methods in this literature and the most recent state-of-the-art techniques. Moreover, 
this course explores different real-world applications of NLP and helps students get 
hands-on experience in this field.    

Instructor Hamidreza Mahyar E-Mail: mahyarh@mcmaster.ca   
Office Hours: upon request 

2. COURSE SPECIFICS 
Course Description  This course covers some fundamental concepts in natural language processing (NLP) 

and how they apply in real-world use cases. 
 Code Type Hours per term 
Instruction Type C Classroom instruction  39 

L Laboratory, workshop or fieldwork  
T Tutorial  
DE Distance education  

Total Hours 39 
Resources ISBN Textbook Title & Edition Author & Publisher 

 Natural Language Processing Jacob Eisenstein 
 

 Speech and Language Processing Dan Jurafsky and James 
H. Martin 

 Deep Learning Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua 
Bengio, and Aaron 

Courville 
Prerequisite(s) • Proficiency in Python programming language 

• Machine Learning and/or Deep Learning knowledge is a plus 
Corequisite(s)  
Antirequisite(s)  
Course Specific Policies All work must be shown to get full credit. 

 
Specific policy of Projects/Assignments submissions: 



 
Projects/Assignments will be conducted online by using related software. Completed 
Projects/Assignments should be uploaded to the drop box before midnight of the due 
date. Projects/Assignments missed due to legitimate reasons must be completed later 
mutually agreed with the instructor. 
 

Departmental Policies The use of cell phones, iPods, laptops and other personal electronic devices are 
 prohibited from the classroom during the class time, unless the instructor makes an 
 explicit exception. 

Announcements made in class or placed on Avenue are considered to have been 
communicated to all students including those individuals that are not in class. 
 
Instructor has the right to submit work to software to identify plagiarism. 
 

3. SUB TOPIC(S)  

Week 1 Overview: Human language, Word meanings, Word2Vec, 
and Optimization basics  

Week 2 Intro to neural networks: Gradients and backpropagation  
Week 3 Recurrent Neural Networks and Language Models  

Week 4 Conditioned Generation  
Part 1: Self attention and transformers 

Week 5   
Part 2: Seq2Seq models 

Week 6 Midterm Recess (No class)  

Week 7 Midterm Test  

Week 8 Prompting, Instruction Finetuning, and RLHF  

Week 9 Question Answering systems  

Week 10 Multimodal models  

Week 11 Project presentation and Q&A  

Week 12 Project presentation and Q&A  

Week 13 Project presentation and Q&A  
Classes end: April 8th  

4. ASSESSMENT OF LEARNING  Weight 
4 Assignments 20% 
4 Quizzes 10% 
Midterm Test 35% 
Group Project 35% 

TOTAL     100% 



 
Note that the percentage distribution of each module may be adjusted.   
Percentage grades will be converted to letter grades and grade points per the University calendar. 
5.   LEARNING OUTCOMES  
By the end of this course, the students will know about: 

• Introduction to Deep Learning  
• Word representations 
• Language models 
• Pre-trained language models 
• Text generation 
• Seq2Seq models 
• Prompting 
• Feedback systems 
• Multimodal models 
• NLP applications (e.g. Q/A systems) 

6.   COURSE OUTLINE – APPROVED ADVISORY STATEMENTS 
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION 
The Faculty of Engineering is concerned with ensuring an environment that is free of all discrimination.  If there is a 
problem, individuals are reminded that they should contact the Associate Director, Graduate Studies, the Sexual 
Harassment Officer or the Human Rights Consultant, as soon as possible. 
http://www.mcmaster.ca/policy/General/HR/Discrimination_Harassment_Sexual_Harassment-
Prevention&Response.pdf 
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY 
You are expected to exhibit honesty and use ethical behaviour in all aspects of the learning process.  Academic 
credentials you earn are rooted in principles of honesty and academic integrity.  It is your responsibility to understand 
what constitutes academic dishonesty.    
Academic dishonesty is to knowingly act or fail to act in a way that results or could result in unearned academic credit 
or advantage.  This behaviour can result in serious consequences, e.g. the grade of zero on an assignment, loss of 
credit with a notation on the transcript (notation reads: “Grade of F assigned for academic dishonesty”), and/or 
suspension or expulsion from the university.  For information on the various types of academic dishonesty please 
refer to the Academic Integrity Policy, located at https://secretariat.mcmaster.ca/university-policies-procedures-
guidelines/  
The following illustrates only three forms of academic dishonesty:  

• plagiarism, e.g. the submission of work that is not one’s own or for which other credit has been obtained. 
• improper collaboration in group work. 
• copying or using unauthorized aids in tests and examinations. 

AUTHENTICITY / PLAGIARISM DETECTION 
Some courses may use a web-based service (Turnitin.com) to reveal authenticity and ownership of student submitted 
work.  For courses using such software, students will be expected to submit their work electronically either directly 
to Turnitin.com or via an online learning platform (e.g. A2L, etc.) using plagiarism detection (a service supported by 
Turnitin.com) so it can be checked for academic dishonesty.    
Students who do not wish their work to be submitted through the plagiarism detection software must inform the 
Instructor before the assignment is due.  No penalty will be assigned to a student who does not submit work to the 
plagiarism detection software.  All submitted work is subject to normal verification that standards of academic 



 
integrity have been upheld (e.g., on-line search, other software, etc.).  For more details about McMaster’s use of 
Turnitin.com  please go to www.mcmaster.ca/academicintegrity. 
COURSES WITH AN ON-LINE ELEMENT 
Some courses may use on-line elements (e.g. e-mail, Avenue to Learn (A2L), LearnLink, web pages, capa, Moodle, 
ThinkingCap, etc.).  Students should be aware that, when they access the electronic components of a course using 
these elements, private information such as first and last names, user names for the McMaster e-mail accounts, and 
program affiliation may become apparent to all other students in the same course. The available information is 
dependent on the technology used.  Continuation in a course that uses on-line elements will be deemed consent to 
this disclosure.  If you have any questions or concerns about such disclosure please discuss this with the course 
instructor. 
ONLINE PROCTORING  
Some courses may use online proctoring software for tests and exams.  This software may require students to turn 
on their video camera, present identification, monitor and record their computer activities, and/or lock/restrict their 
browser or other applications/software during tests or exams.  This software may be required to be installed before 
the test/exam begins. 
COMMUNICATIONS 
It is the student’s responsibility to: 

• Maintain current contact information with the University, including address, phone numbers, and emergency 
contact information. 

• Use the University provided e-mail address or maintain a valid forwarding e-mail address. 
• Regularly check the official University communications channels.  Official University 

 communications are considered received if sent by postal mail, by fax, or by e-mail to the student’s 
designated primary e-mail account via their @mcmaster.ca alias. 

• Accept that forwarded e-mails may be lost and that e-mail is considered received if sent via the student’s 
@mcmaster.ca alias. 

• Check the McMaster/Avenue email and course websites on a regular basis during the term. 
CONDUCT EXPECTATIONS 
As a McMaster student, you have the right to experience, and the responsibility to demonstrate, respectful and 
dignified interactions within all of our living, learning and working communities. These expectations are described in 
the Code of Student Rights & Responsibilities (the “Code”).  All students share the responsibility of maintaining a 
positive environment for the academic and personal growth of all McMaster community members, whether in person 
or online.  
It is essential that students be mindful of their interactions online, as the Code remains in effect in virtual learning 
environments.  The Code applies to any interactions that adversely affect, disrupt, or interfere with reasonable 
participation in University activities. Student disruptions or behaviours that interfere with university functions on 
online platforms (e.g. use of Avenue 2 Learn, WebEx or Zoom for delivery), will be taken very seriously and will be 
investigated. Outcomes may include restriction or removal of the involved students’ access to these platforms. 

ACADEMIC ACCOMMODATION OF STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES 
Students with disabilities who require academic accommodation must contact Student Accessibility Services (SAS) at 
905-525-9140 ext. 28652 or sas@mcmaster.ca to make arrangements with a Program Coordinator.  For further 
information, consult McMaster University’s Academic Accommodation of Students with Disabilities policy. 

ACADEMIC ACCOMMODATION FOR RELIGIOUS, INDIGENOUS OR SPIRITUAL OBSERVANCES (RISO) 



 
Students requiring academic accommodation based on religious, indigenous or spiritual observances should follow 
the procedures set out in the RISO policy.  Students should submit their request to their Faculty Office normally 
within 10 working days of the beginning of term in which they anticipate a need for accommodation or to the 
Registrar's Office prior to their examinations.  Students should also contact their instructors as soon as possible to 
make alternative arrangements for classes, assignments, and tests. http://www.mcmaster.ca/policy/Students-
AcademicStudies/Studentcode.pdf  

COPYRIGHT AND RECORDING 
Students are advised that lectures, demonstrations, performances, and any other course material provided by an 
instructor include copyright protected works.  The Copyright Act and copyright law protect every original literary, 
dramatic, musical and artistic work, including lectures by University instructors  
The recording of lectures, tutorials, or other methods of instruction may occur during a course.  Recording may be 
done by either the instructor for the purpose of authorized distribution, or by a student for the purpose of personal 
study. Students should be aware that their voice and/or image may be recorded by others during the class.  Please 
speak with the instructor if this is a concern for you. 
EXTREME CIRCUMSTANCES 
The University reserves the right to change the dates and deadlines for any or all courses in extreme circumstances 
(e.g., severe weather, labour disruptions, etc.).  Changes will be communicated through regular McMaster 
communication channels, such as McMaster Daily News, A2L and/or McMaster email.